---
layout: post
title: LevelUp Build Week 7
categories: [courses]
tags: [learning, levelup]
date: 2015-10-07 12:30:00 +1000
excerpt: No special activities this week, just focusing on the team project and lead up into the final showcase on saturday.
---
<style>

table{
	margin: 0 auto;
    border-collapse: collapse;
    border-spacing: 0;
    border:2px solid #000000;
}

th{
    background: #33824c;
    color: white;
}

th, td{
    border:2px solid #000000;
    padding: 10px;
}

td{
	color: black;
}

tr:nth-child(even){
	background: #afceb8;
}

tr:nth-child(odd){
	background: #daf0ed;
}
</style>

This weeks agenda:

<table>
	<tr><td>1800</td><td>Arrival & Food</td></tr>
	<tr><td>1815</td><td>Team Standups (by colour)</td></tr>
	<tr><td>1830</td><td>Team Work</td></tr>
	<tr><td>2045</td><td>RETROs (in teams)</td></tr>
	<tr><td>2100</td><td>Close and clean</td></tr>
</table>

## Standup

I ran the meeting today. This week we had 4 devs (Ray, Andrew, Cherry, Albert would arrive later) and 3 BAs which was more promising than the previous few weeks. Andrew paired with a dev coach to finish work on health services. Gabe was away so the jokes story she was working on last week was put aside and blocked. As there weren't enough devs last week, she couldn't pair with anyone which meant none of the devs could pick up from where she left off. Ray and Cherry paired up to resume work on the personalisation menu.  Ray said the emergency contact screen might not be done in time so Rujia said it was ok to hard code the input for now. Rujia reprioritised the minimum set of stories she wanted for the final showcase which included the emergency button working, services and would add more depending on how fast the devs were moving.

## Team Work

Sean and Monica created a pen/paper mockup of the confirmation message that pops up when sending a message to the emergency contact. On successful delivery, a 'message sent' screen would appear and pressing any button would take Allen (our imaginary user's name) back to the home screen. On failure, an error message would show the emergency contact number and pressing any button would return to the home screen. 

Ziba wrote a new story about showing a family photo after sending an emergency message. If the message is sent, a photo with a 'message sent' overlay is shown and after 3s, the text disappears but Allen needs to press any button to return to home screen. 

In week 5, I commented that we needed a setting to change the name so that when the emergency contact received the message, they would know who to contact. After talking to Rujia and Sean, they agreed to replace 'my contact' setting with 'name' because it was more important for the emergency contact to know who the message was from. The idea behind 'my contact' was so that if Allen lost his watch, the finder could make contact with him. I wrote another story very similar to the emergency contact screen as the mockups for both are very similar ([emergency screen][1] and [name screen][2]). 

Nikki informed us that a slide deck template was available on slack so we could begin working on the showcase on Saturday. We are to give a 10min presentation giving a problem statement, definition, what we learned, could have done better, a demo and Q&A. Some of the slides were filled out and we discussed how many minutes we should spend on each slide and how many people should talk but nothing was finalised. We expect to have it done on Saturday when we have the final 2 sprints before the showcase.

## RETRO

Cherry ran the meeting and although the positive outcome was better team cohesion and productivity (we've actually started to work more autonomously, thanks to the coaches tuition), there was still lots to do and not enough time. We can alter work load and the MVP as we go. Also, we have the dev coaches to make up for low numbers. I raised concern over who would be talking and felt that there wasn't enough time for everybody to speak so we should have at least 1 BA, Dev, XD speak.  Andrew said some of us could do non-speaking roles such as demoing while someone else spoke. 

# References
[1]:2015-09-23-Week-5-User-Testing.md
[2]:2015-09-30-Week-6-Psychology-Behind-Agile.md